---
title: run_analysis.R for Coursera - Getting and Cleaning Data - Week 4 - Project
author: Thomas Hill III
date: 2019 January 19
output:  CourseraGetCleanWk4ProjectTidyData.txt
---

## Project Description
One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing. Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users. 
This project will take accelerometer data (from a Samsung Galaxy 5 smartphone) and analyze it for mean and standard deviation of some of the measurememnts

##Study design and data processing

###Collection of the raw data

The data linked to from the course website represent data collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone.

Description from the files in the .zip is as follows -

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

###Notes on the original (raw) data 
The data are measures of acceleration that have been scaled (proportionately reduced) and then centered (add or subtract a value to change the range of the values) in order to keep all of the numbers between -1 and 1.

##Creating the tidy datafile

###Guide to create the tidy data file
1) Download the data - download.file(fileUrl, destfile = "./data/SamsungGalaxy5.zip")
2) Run the WinRAR extractor to open up the .zip file - This is done manually outside of R
3) Read in X_test, y_test, X_train, y_train, and features.txt into R variables using read.table() and setting colClasses to "numeric" for X and "character" for y. Features uses "stringsAsFactors=FALSE".
4) Use rbind() and cbind() to combine the four files into one dataset with size 10299x561
5) Use duplicated() to find and remove duplicate column names from the data so that they don't break things later. This is OK because we don't need any of the columns removed that way for the further data analysis. We are left with a 10299x477 data frame of numbers.
6) The numeric values in the y files are translated into words by reading in "activity_labels.txt", merging it onto the dataset and then using a custom function and sapply() to change the numbers to descriptive text.
7) We can add an indicator on the front of the data frame using the same method to tell us which subject (of the 30) generated the numbers in that row.
8) at this point we have a dataset of 10299 rows of data. The columns are the Activity, the Subject, and the 79 variables.
9) group_by() and summarise() allow us to find means for each of the sets of measurement variables that correspond to each combination of activity and subject.
10) This is our tidy dataset.


##Description of the variables in the tiny_data.txt file
 - This is a table of 180 rows (6 activities * 30 subjects) and 81 columns (as detailed in step 8 above).
 - This shos us the overall average and standard deviation for each of the sets of measurements generated by one subject doing one activity (e.g. subject 31 doing activity 7 100 times)
 -  The variable names in the tidy dataset are
 [1] "Subject"                        
 [2] "Activity"                       
 [3] "tBodyAcc-mean()-X"              
 [4] "tBodyAcc-mean()-Y"              
 [5] "tBodyAcc-mean()-Z"              
 [6] "tBodyAcc-std()-X"               
 [7] "tBodyAcc-std()-Y"               
 [8] "tBodyAcc-std()-Z"               
 [9] "tGravityAcc-mean()-X"           
[10] "tGravityAcc-mean()-Y"           
[11] "tGravityAcc-mean()-Z"           
[12] "tGravityAcc-std()-X"            
[13] "tGravityAcc-std()-Y"            
[14] "tGravityAcc-std()-Z"            
[15] "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X"          
[16] "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y"          
[17] "tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z"          
[18] "tBodyAccJerk-std()-X"           
[19] "tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y"           
[20] "tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z"           
[21] "tBodyGyro-mean()-X"             
[22] "tBodyGyro-mean()-Y"             
[23] "tBodyGyro-mean()-Z"             
[24] "tBodyGyro-std()-X"              
[25] "tBodyGyro-std()-Y"              
[26] "tBodyGyro-std()-Z"              
[27] "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X"         
[28] "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y"         
[29] "tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z"         
[30] "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X"          
[31] "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y"          
[32] "tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Z"          
[33] "tBodyAccMag-mean()"             
[34] "tBodyAccMag-std()"              
[35] "tGravityAccMag-mean()"          
[36] "tGravityAccMag-std()"           
[37] "tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()"         
[38] "tBodyAccJerkMag-std()"          
[39] "tBodyGyroMag-mean()"            
[40] "tBodyGyroMag-std()"             
[41] "tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()"        
[42] "tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()"         
[43] "fBodyAcc-mean()-X"              
[44] "fBodyAcc-mean()-Y"              
[45] "fBodyAcc-mean()-Z"              
[46] "fBodyAcc-std()-X"               
[47] "fBodyAcc-std()-Y"               
[48] "fBodyAcc-std()-Z"               
[49] "fBodyAcc-meanFreq()-X"          
[50] "fBodyAcc-meanFreq()-Y"          
[51] "fBodyAcc-meanFreq()-Z"          
[52] "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X"          
[53] "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y"          
[54] "fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z"          
[55] "fBodyAccJerk-std()-X"           
[56] "fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y"           
[57] "fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z"           
[58] "fBodyAccJerk-meanFreq()-X"      
[59] "fBodyAccJerk-meanFreq()-Y"      
[60] "fBodyAccJerk-meanFreq()-Z"      
[61] "fBodyGyro-mean()-X"             
[62] "fBodyGyro-mean()-Y"             
[63] "fBodyGyro-mean()-Z"             
[64] "fBodyGyro-std()-X"              
[65] "fBodyGyro-std()-Y"              
[66] "fBodyGyro-std()-Z"              
[67] "fBodyGyro-meanFreq()-X"         
[68] "fBodyGyro-meanFreq()-Y"         
[69] "fBodyGyro-meanFreq()-Z"         
[70] "fBodyAccMag-mean()"             
[71] "fBodyAccMag-std()"              
[72] "fBodyAccMag-meanFreq()"         
[73] "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()"     
[74] "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()"      
[75] "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-meanFreq()" 
[76] "fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()"        
[77] "fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()"         
[78] "fBodyBodyGyroMag-meanFreq()"    
[79] "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()"    
[80] "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()"     
[81] "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-meanFreq()"

###Variable descriptions - from the features_info.txt file

See the "Collection of Raw Data" section for some decriptions of the raw data.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation
mad(): Median absolute deviation 
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
sma(): Signal magnitude area
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
iqr(): Interquartile range 
entropy(): Signal entropy
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between to vectors.

In general every value in the dataset excepting the Subject and Activity columns
  - is numeric (a "double" to R)
  - varied in the interval [-1,1].
  - is measured in "g"s (gravities)
